E2fsprogs 1.47.2 (January 1, 2025)
==================================

Updates/Fixes since v1.47.1:

UI and Features
---------------

Drop the tune2fs -r option and replace it with -E revision=<fs-rev>.
Revision 0 file systems are needed for compatibility with pre-1995 Linux
kernels (older that version 1.2).  Most of the time, users shouldn't be
using the -r option and they can confuse themselves and end up creating
a file system that is missing most modern ext4 features, including no
online resizing, no support for post-2038 timestamps, etc.  (Addresses
Debian Bug #1086603)

Add support for gnu.translator extended attributes in tar files fed to
mke2fs -d.  (Addresses Github issue
https://github.com/tytso/e2fsprogs/issues/192)

Add a debugfs command to list all of the inodes in the orphan list.


Fixes
-----

Fix orphan_file support on big endian systems.

Fix resize2fs to update the checksums in blocks belonging to the orphan
file if it needs to move them.

Fix e2fsck to clear the orphan file after processing it so that e2fsck
-E journal_only doesn't leave the file system in a corrupted state.

Avoid a spurious failure in badblocks when -n or -w is specified twice.
(Addresses Debian Bug #1087341)

Fix a bug where e2fsck could skip checking a file systems with the
orphan_file feature if there are orphaned files that need to be cleaned
up.  (Addresses Red Hat Bugzilla 2318710, SuSE Bugzilla #1226043)

Tune2fs will now upgrade a revision 0 file system to revision 1 before
trying to change the inode size.  Otherwise, this could result in a
corrupted file system.

Fix fuse2fs --helpfull so that it displays the full help message.

Allow resize2fs to perform an offline resize past the 256 TiB boundary
(which the kernel could do as part of an online resize).



Performance, Internal Implementation, Development Support etc.
--------------------------------------------------------------

Fix various Coverity and compiler warnings.

Speed up tune2fs -g when the group is not changed by the command.

Fix build failures on GCC 15 due to it switched to using -std=c23 by
default.  (Addresses https://github.com/tytso/e2fsprogs/issues/202)

Fix build failure when linking fuse2fs with old (2.9.9) version of
libfuse2 on aarch64.  This hack was needed to fix a regression caused by
another hacky workaround needed to work around a build failure on
mipsel64 thanks to glibc using different struct stat layouts depending
_FILE_OFFSET_BITS is set and this caused failures when dynamic linking
against libarchive on Debian's mipsel64.  (Sigh.)

Fix unused parameter warnings for packages which including ext2fs.h.
(Addresses Debian Bug #1082500)

Fix bug where packages including ext2fs.h would get the 32-bit versions
of the timestamp routines even on 64-bit platforms due to a missing
SIZEOF_TIME_T autoconf definiton in public_config.h.

Teach dumpe2fs and e2mmpstatus to support LABEL= and UUID= specifiers
since the e2mmpstatus man page claims that it supports LABEL= and UUID=.
This support was accidentally dropped when e2mmpstatus was reimplemented
in terms of dumpe2fs.  (Addresses
https://github.com/tytso/e2fsprogs/issues/106)

Suppress mke2fs's "Creating regular file" message when the -q option is
in force.

Enable Continuous Integration testing in Debian's Salsa forge.

Fix a memory leak in oss-fuzz test programs.

Provide fuseext2 to replace the debian package src:fuse-umfuse-ext2.
(Addresses Debian Bug #1085590, #1088838)

In the Debian package for e2fsprogs, add a suggestion to install the
package libarchive13t64.  (Addresses DebianBug #1089085)

In the Debian package for e2fsprogs, decrease the priority from required
to important.   (Addresses Debian Bug #897277)

Fix the f_badjour_encrypted test to write the error output from mke2fs
and debugfs to a log file so it doesn't mess up the "make check" output
and to make those error messages available in the case of test failure.

Fix my_llseek() declaration when building against musl libc.

Clean up groff warnings in man pages.  (Addresses Debian Bugs #1086892,
#1082787, #1072866, #1087898)

Document the orphan_file feature in the ext4(5) and tune2fs(8) man
pages.  (Addresses Debian Bug #1073062)

Allow building e2fsprogs without libarchive-dev installed to make life
easier for bootstrapping for new Debian ports (Addresses Debian Bug
#1078693)

Various man page cleanups.

Update Chinese, Czech, French, Malay, Polish, Romainian, Spanish,
Swedish, and Ukrainian translations.
